PPTT-2710 Added `Downloads and Outlink` guide. (#629)
PiwikPRO/PPMS-PublicDocs: data_collection/web/guides.rst

Downloads and Outlinks
----------------------

.. note::

>   If you want to use CSS classes or HTML attributes to mark links as download or outlink and you have modified default JS snippet, make sure that :ref:`enableLinkTracking<tracking-outlink>` is called. It is enabled in default snippet, but if you use a custom one, then you have to enable it by yourself.

Reviewer: The first information a users sees is a note about some workaround. I think at first he should be presented with happy path, please move it somewhere down

Author: Moved to the paragrapgh about marking links with CSS classes.

```

> // Enable Download & Outlink tracking

Reviewer: Without any text under it I would think I need to copy it to my tracking code - but I do not need to. 

Downloads and Outlinks should work by default in 95% of cases. The rest are customs. Please add information about it.

Author: There is such info in a text above `It is enabled in default snippet`

Reviewer: It is now lower in the document, so it is ok

_paq.push(['enableLinkTracking']);
```

Downloads
^^^^^^^^^

> Usually, you want to track when visitors downloads files from your website, a document, a file, a photo. Piwik PRO will automatically track clicks on such links as Downloads, and reports them in `Downloads` report.

Author: changed

It will automatically recognize such when a clicked link contains one of following file extensions (extensions starts with "." character and one of following characters sets):

```
7z, aac, apk, arc, arj, asf, asx, avi, azw3, bin, bz, bz2, csv, deb, dmg, doc, docx, epub, exe, flv, gif, gz, gzip, hqx, ibooks, jar, jpg, jpeg, js, mp2, mp3, mp4, mpg, mpeg, mobi, mov, movie, msi, msp, odb, odf, odg, ods, odt, ogg, ogv, pdf, phps, png, ppt, pptx, qt, qtm, ra, ram, rar, rpm, sea, sit, tar, tbz, tbz2, tgz, torrent, txt, wav, wma, wmv, wpd, xls, xlsx, xml, z, zip
```

In one of following link schemas:

 - file extension is at the very end of a link eg. `http://example.com/file.7z` or `http://example.com/article?click=file.7z`
 - file extension directly preceeds query part (`?`), eg. `http://example.com/article/file.7z?source=user#how-to`
 - file extension directly preceeds fragment part (`#`) `http://example.com/article?target=file.7z#how-to`
 - file extension is at the end of query param, eg. `http://example.com/article?click=file.7z&page=3`

Customizing list of file extensions
"""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""

> You can customize list of file extansions you want to track as downloads. For example, if you want to track only images as downloads, you can use `setDownloadExtensions` function to replace the list this:

Reviewer: `extansions`

```

> // track clicks on images only

Reviewer: It does not track click on images, it track downloads of images

Author: No I get it, actually it does not click downloads per se, because it is internal abstraction of a browser. So what is available to a JS tracker are link clicks. And if a link fulfills download rules, then it is counted as a download.
Changed to:
```
// track clicks on images links (eg. <a href="image.png">) only  
```

Reviewer: git

_paq.push(['setDownloadExtensions', "png|jpg|webp|gif"]);
```

You can add new extensions, to an existing list with `addDownloadExtensions`:

```
// add other image formats
_paq.push(['setDownloadExtensions', "svg|xcf"]);
```

Or remove some of extenstions from the existing list with `removeDownloadExtensions`:

```
_paq.push(['removeDownloadExtensions', "jpg|jpeg"]);

> _paq.push(['trackPageView']);

Reviewer: IS track page view nescessary here?

Author: Not, but it is like this in Matomo documentation. If you insist I can remove those extra `trackPageView`

Reviewer: I will not fight about it

```

> Tracking downloads beyond file extensions

Reviewer: `beyond file extensions` is not clear for me. Can you change it to something like html attributes?

Author: I would propose `Pinponting download links` or `Manually marking links as downloads`

Reviewer: I can see you changed into `Manually marking links as downloads`. Good

"""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""

If your case of download links does not fall in above cases you still have options to use, to tell tracker that link should be tracked as a download.

You can add a download attribute to a link HTML tag. eg. 

```<a href="/target-file" download>```

Or if you have to be strict with your HTML, you can add a HTML tag class. Default classes are `piwik_download` and `piwik-download`. Eg. 

```<a href="/taget-file" class="piwik-download">```

Additionally you can define your custom CSS classes for download links with ours :ref:`Javascript Tracker API<force-tracking-download-using-css-class>`. Eg. 

```
_paq.push(['setDownloadClasses', "custom-download-class"]);

> _paq.push(['trackPageView']);

Reviewer: Is track page view nescessary?

Author: https://github.com/PiwikPRO/PPMS-PublicDocs/pull/629/files#r705232674

Reviewer: I will not fight about it

```

or you can define a list of classes at once, by passing an array list of CSS classes:

```
_paq.push(['setDownloadClasses', ["custom-download-class", "other-download-class", "another-class"]]);
_paq.push(['trackPageView']);
```

and in HTML code:

```<a href="/taget-file" class="custom-download-class">```

.. note::
You have to remember that using `setDownloadClasses` always overwrite current list of CSS classes.

Tracking downloads with inline Javascript
"""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""

There is another alternative for above methods. You can track a download with inline javascript. Insert inline javascript to HTML tag with onclick attribute:

```
<a href="https://piwik.pro/document-url" target="_blank" onClick="_paq.push(['trackLink', 'https://piwik.pro/document-url', 'download']);">Download document</a>
```

> Tracking downloads when using log importer

Reviewer: Log importer is not part of 16.0, please hide/remove it. I think better place for this information is Web log analytics doc

Author: I did hide it with ```.. hide::```

Reviewer: :nice:

""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""

When you use the :ref:`Log Importer<data-collection-web-log-analytics>`, files with one of the file extensions listed above will be automatically tracked as downloads in Piwik PRO.

Outlinks
^^^^^^^^

> The Piwik PRO `Outlinks` report shows the list of external URLs that were clicked by your visitors. Outlinks are links that have different domain than those configured for your website. For example, if your visitor click on a link to `piwik.pro` and your website domain is `example.org`, this will be reported as an outlink, no matter if the website opens in current tab/window or a new one. For each outlink, Piwik PRO will report the number of clicks, and the number of unique clicks. Unique clicks are the number of unique visitors that clicked to a given domain. If one visitor clicks multiple times on one outlink it will be reported as one unique click and multiple clicks. For example `http://piwik.pro/` will have 5 clicks and 1 unique click. 

Reviewer: I'm not sure if this:
> Piwik PRO will report the number of clicks, and the number of unique clicks. Unique clicks are the number of unique visitors that clicked to a given domain. If one visitor clicks multiple times on one outlink it will be reported as one unique click and multiple clicks. For example `http://piwik.pro/` will have 5 clicks and 1 unique click.

is needed here. It is the reporting part

Author: Removed

> For each outlink, Piwik PRO will report the number of clicks, and the number of unique clicks. Unique clicks are the number of unique visitors that clicked to a given domain. If one visitor clicks multiple times on one outlink it will be reported as one unique click and multiple clicks. For example `http://piwik.pro/` will have 5 clicks and 1 unique click.

part

```<a href="https://piwik.pro">Piwik PRO</a>```

> Confguring which domains are outlinks

Author: changed

"""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""

> If you want to track links on your subdomains as a regular PageViews, for example whan your main page is `piwik.pro` and you want to track views of `blog.piwik.pro` as a regular PageViews not outlinks, you have to confgure tracker to recognize this additional domain. You can do it in two ways.

Reviewer: To be precised, in this case `blog.piwik.pro` will be always tracked as page view. We want to get rid of the additional outlink

Reviewer: We use `page view` instead of `PageViews`, please change.

Author: Changed

> If you want to track links on your subdomains as a regular PageViews, for example whan your main page is `piwik.pro` and you want to track views of `blog.piwik.pro` as a regular PageViews not outlinks, you have to confgure tracker to recognize this additional domain. You can do it in two ways.

Reviewer 2: Let's use an example of a real webpage. https://piwik.pro/blog/ this is our blog address

Reviewer 2: I've looked again... In the context of a subdomain https://help.piwik.pro/ will be better :)

Author: changed to `help.piwik.pro`

You can configure it in website settings section of the Administration panel. Go to the Administration > Websites & apps > Settings > General settings > URLs. Add all the domains that should not be treated as outlinks.

> [Here is the screenshoot of Administration panel]

Reviewer: Wher is the screenshot? :)

Author: I thought that somebody would prepare such screenshot. Nvm I 'll add it.

Author: added

> You can use :ref:`setDomains()<ignoring-alias-domains>` function of JS tracker.

Reviewer: Please add information that it can be done manually and here is description how to do it

Author: What do you mean by manually doing it? I know about Administration panel and custom tracking tag. What more there is?

Reviewer: Honestly, I do not know. :D

```

> _paq(['setDomains', ["blog.piwik.pro", "piwik.pro", "*.other-domain.pro"]]);

Reviewer: I'm not sure we should paste here examples of code that is not strictly connected to `Download or Outlink` tracking, but ok, let's leave it

Author: Well it has an impact on outlink tracking. I like complementary guides when you can find all the ways and not have to guess where to find missing knowledge.

_paq.push(['trackPageView']);
```

.. note::
  This will overwrite URLs configured in Administration panel, so use it wisely.

Marking links as outlinks in HTML code
""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""

Similar as downloads, links can be set to be treated as outlinks manually, but only with CSS classes, you cannot use a HTML attribute.

You can use one of default CSS classes: `piwik_link` or `piwik-link`. eg. 

```
<a href='https://piwik.pro' class="piwik-link">Piwik PRO</a>
```

> Or you can define your custom CSS classes for outlinks with ours :ref:`Javascript Tracker API<force-tracking-using-css-class>`. 

Reviewer: `with ours` does not sound professional, please change

Author: To what?

Author: ok, removed `ours`

```

> // now all clicks on links with the css class "external" will be counted as outlinks

Reviewer: where is the `external` part? I do not see it here

Author: Changed to `custom-link-class` as it should be

// you can also pass an array of strings

> _paq.push(['setLinkClasses', "custom-link-class"]);

Reviewer: Should information about all variances be available here or in the description of `setLinkClasses` function (level 4)? I think here we should limit to one example

Author: It is guide, so I think yes. I see no sense in guides that show you that something is possible and show only a part of it.

_paq.push(['trackPageView']);
```

or a list of classes

```
_paq.push(['setLinkClasses', ["custom-link-class", "other-link-class"]]);

_paq.push(['trackPageView']);
```

and in HTML code

```
<a href='https://piwik.pro' class="custom-link-class">Piwik PRO</a>
```

Marking links with inline Javascript
""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""

Alternatively you can use an inline javascript and onclick attribute to track any link as an outlink.

```
<a href="mailto:support@piwik.pro" target="_blank" onClick="_paq.push(['trackLink', 'https://piwik.pro/support-contact-form', 'link']);">Write us a message.</a>
```

Other related  abilities
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Changing delay for link tracking
""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""
All link tracking uses a slight delay of click execution, so the browser won't exit the page before a click is tracked. The default value of such delay is 500ms, but you can modify it as you wish. You have to remember that if you set this value too low, it might be not enough to track the click, if you set it too high, the browser might ignore the delay.

```
_paq.push(['setLinkTrackingTimer', 300]); // 300 milliseconds

> _paq.push(['trackPageView']);

Reviewer: Is the track page view nescessary?

Author: https://github.com/PiwikPRO/PPMS-PublicDocs/pull/629/files#r705232674

```

Disable download and outlink tracking
"""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""

> To explicitly disable link tracking you can use `disableLinkTracking` function. After sing it, all of link clicks won't be tracked.

Reviewer: `sing it`?

Author: :D

```
_paq.push(['disableLinkTracking']);
```

Disabling link tracking with CSS classes
""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""

You can mark links that you do not with to track with CSS classes. JS Tracker will ignore such links and won't track them.

```
_paq.push(['setIgnoreClasses', "do-not-track"]);
_paq.push(['trackPageView']);
```

or a list of classes:

```
_paq.push(['setIgnoreClasses', ["dont-track-this", "this-either", "nor-this"]]);
_paq.push(['trackPageView']);
```

and later in HTML code:

```
<a href="https://piwik.pro/document.pdf" class="dont-track-this">A document, that should not be tracked.</a>
```

> 

Reviewer: Please add information that enableLinkTracking can be called multiple times. When a link appears after page is loaded then we won't track it as scanning of all links is done when the method is called. IF someone uses for example SPA, he need to call it every time a page is updated.

Author: Added new subsection.

Author: ```Tracking link clicks on pages with dynamically generated content```

Reviewer: nice

A Tip
"""""

> To increase accuracy of download and outlink tracking, you can consider enabling the use of :ref:`navigator.sendBeacon()<navigation-send-beacon>`.

Reviewer: We should consider setting is by default for download and outlinks if it is a valid tip. I think this tip would need a longer description and a different name. Maybe remove it here and add a task for it?

Author: Ok, I will do so.

Author: https://piwikpro.atlassian.net/browse/PPTT-2763

Reviewer: thanks

Downloads and Outlinks
----------------------

Downloads
^^^^^^^^^

> Usually, you want to track when visitors download files from your website, a document, a file, a photo. Piwik PRO will automatically track clicks on such links as Downloads, and reports them in `Downloads` report.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Download data helps you learn which files people pick from your site — be it a white paper, a case study, or a guide in pdf. Piwik PRO will automatically track clicks on such links as `Downloads`, and reports them in `Downloads` report.
```
I'd change the intro into sth like the txt used also in our HC

Author: changed
